README.md, before:

# EUF base profile for Drupal projects

This is a base profile for Drupal 8 projects to be used within the EUF. This template is built upon the [drupal-composer/drupal-project](https://github.com/drupal-composer/drupal-project) and [docker4drupal](https://github.com/wodby/docker4drupal) - refer to the respective documentations whenever necessary.

## Usage

In order to test this profile, follow these steps:

    git clone git@github.com:EuropeanUniversityFoundation/euf-base.git
    cd euf-base
    cp .env.example .env
    nano .env

Change the necessary environment variables, according to the comments in the file.

### Launching docker4drupal

For macos users some extra steps are required:

  - `cp macos.docker-compose.override.yml docker-compose.override.yml`
  - run `docker-sync start --foreground` in a separate shell
  - change the PHP container definitions in `.env`

To launch the containers, simply run `make up`.

Then start a shell inside the main container with `make shell`.

### Inside the container OR on a normal LAMP stack

To download the necessary dependencies:

    composer install

When installing for the first time, there is a bundled quick install:

    chmod u+x env-install.sh
    ./env-install.sh

After a first time install, change the `settings.php` file to use `settings.local.php` instead:

    chmod u+w web/sites/default/settings.php
    nano web/sites/default/settings.php

Comment out the database settings block and add the following lines to the end of the file:

    if (file_exists($app_root . '/' . $site_path . '/settings.local.php')) {
      include $app_root . '/' . $site_path . '/settings.local.php';
    }

Finally, clear the cache:

    vendor/bin/drush cr

## Troubleshooting

Some common issues and quick solutions...

### Scaffolding permissions issue

Composer require or update may fail because the scaffold plugin cannot replace files in `web/sites/default`; fix with `chmod u+w web/sites/default`.

---

## What does the template do?

When installing the given `composer.json` some tasks are taken care of:

* Drupal will be installed in the `web`-directory.
* Autoloader is implemented to use the generated composer autoloader in `vendor/autoload.php`,
  instead of the one provided by Drupal (`web/vendor/autoload.php`).
* Modules (packages of type `drupal-module`) will be placed in `web/modules/contrib/`
* Theme (packages of type `drupal-theme`) will be placed in `web/themes/contrib/`
* Profiles (packages of type `drupal-profile`) will be placed in `web/profiles/contrib/`
* Creates default writable versions of `settings.php` and `services.yml`.
* Creates `web/sites/default/files`-directory.
* Latest version of drush is installed locally for use at `vendor/bin/drush`.
* Latest version of DrupalConsole is installed locally for use at `vendor/bin/drupal`.
* Creates environment variables based on your .env file. See [.env.example](.env.example).

## Updating Drupal Core

This project will attempt to keep all of your Drupal Core files up-to-date; the
project [drupal/core-composer-scaffold](https://github.com/drupal/core-composer-scaffold)
is used to ensure that your scaffold files are updated every time drupal/core is
updated. If you customize any of the "scaffolding" files (commonly .htaccess),
you may need to merge conflicts if any of your modified files are updated in a
new release of Drupal core.

Follow the steps below to update your core files.

1. Run `composer update drupal/core drupal/core-dev --with-dependencies` to update Drupal Core and its dependencies.
2. Run `git diff` to determine if any of the scaffolding files have changed.
   Review the files for any changes and restore any customizations to
  `.htaccess` or `robots.txt`.
1. Commit everything all together in a single commit, so `web` will remain in
   sync with the `core` when checking out branches or running `git bisect`.
1. In the event that there are non-trivial conflicts in step 2, you may wish
   to perform these steps on a branch, and use `git merge` to combine the
   updated core files with your customized files. This facilitates the use
   of a [three-way merge tool such as kdiff3](http://www.gitshah.com/2010/12/how-to-setup-kdiff-as-diff-tool-for-git.html). This setup is not necessary if your changes are simple;
   keeping all of your modifications at the beginning or end of the file is a
   good strategy to keep merges easy.

## Generate composer.json from existing project

With using [the "Composer Generate" drush extension](https://www.drupal.org/project/composer_generate)
you can now generate a basic `composer.json` file from an existing project. Note
that the generated `composer.json` might differ from this project's file.


## FAQ

### Should I commit the contrib modules I download?

Composer recommends **no**. They provide [argumentation against but also
workrounds if a project decides to do it anyway](https://getcomposer.org/doc/faqs/should-i-commit-the-dependencies-in-my-vendor-directory.md).

### Should I commit the scaffolding files?

The [Drupal Composer Scaffold](https://github.com/drupal/core-composer-scaffold) plugin can download the scaffold files (like
index.php, update.php, …) to the web/ directory of your project. If you have not customized those files you could choose
to not check them into your version control system (e.g. git). If that is the case for your project it might be
convenient to automatically run the drupal-scaffold plugin after every install or update of your project. You can
achieve that by registering `@composer drupal:scaffold` as post-install and post-update command in your composer.json:

```json
"scripts": {
    "post-install-cmd": [
        "@composer drupal:scaffold",
        "..."
    ],
    "post-update-cmd": [
        "@composer drupal:scaffold",
        "..."
    ]
},
```
### How can I apply patches to downloaded modules?

If you need to apply patches (depending on the project being modified, a pull
request is often a better solution), you can do so with the
[composer-patches](https://github.com/cweagans/composer-patches) plugin.

To add a patch to drupal module foobar insert the patches section in the extra
section of composer.json:
```json
"extra": {
    "patches": {
        "drupal/foobar": {
            "Patch description": "URL or local path to patch"
        }
    }
}
```
### How do I switch from packagist.drupal-composer.org to packages.drupal.org?

Follow the instructions in the [documentation on drupal.org](https://www.drupal.org/docs/develop/using-composer/using-packagesdrupalorg).

### How do I specify a PHP version ?

This project supports PHP 7.0 as minimum version (see [Drupal 8 PHP requirements](https://www.drupal.org/docs/8/system-requirements/drupal-8-php-requirements)), however it's possible that a `composer update` will upgrade some package that will then require PHP 7+.

To prevent this you can add this code to specify the PHP version you want to use in the `config` section of `composer.json`:
```json
"config": {
    "sort-packages": true,
    "platform": {
        "php": "7.0.33"
    }
},
```

Commit message:

Updated documentation; enabled COMPOSER_AUTH

README.md, after:

# EUF base profile for Drupal projects

This is a base profile for Drupal 8 projects to be used within the EUF. This template is built upon the [drupal-composer/drupal-project](https://github.com/drupal-composer/drupal-project) and [docker4drupal](https://github.com/wodby/docker4drupal) - refer to the respective documentations whenever necessary.

## Usage

In order to test this profile, follow these steps:

    git clone git@github.com:EuropeanUniversityFoundation/euf-base.git
    cd euf-base
    cp .env.example .env
    nano .env

Change the necessary environment variables, according to the comments in the file.

### Launching docker4drupal

To launch the containers, simply run `make up`.

Then start a shell inside the main container with `make shell`.

#### HTTP_PORT

By default the Traefik container will bind to port 8000; in order to use multiple setups at the same time, change the port number on your local environment to another number.  **Warning:** port 8025 is used by Mailhog.

#### COMPOSER_AUTH

Some dependencies are pulled directly from Github repositories. During development, every `composer` operation will hit the Github API, which can lead to too many anonymous calls and getting locked out. To avoid this, generate a Personal Access Token and include it in the `.env` file; the token will then be loaded by the Composer configuration inside the PHP container.

### Inside the container OR on a normal LAMP stack

To download the necessary dependencies:

    composer install

When installing for the first time, there is a bundled quick install:

    chmod u+x env-install.sh
    ./env-install.sh

After a first time install, change the `settings.php` file to use `settings.local.php` instead:

    chmod u+w web/sites/default/settings.php
    nano web/sites/default/settings.php

Comment out the database settings block and add the following lines to the end of the file:

    if (file_exists($app_root . '/' . $site_path . '/settings.local.php')) {
      include $app_root . '/' . $site_path . '/settings.local.php';
    }

Finally, clear the cache:

    vendor/bin/drush cr

## Troubleshooting

Some common issues and quick solutions...

### Scaffolding permissions issue

Composer require or update may fail because the scaffold plugin cannot replace files in `web/sites/default`; fix with `chmod u+w web/sites/default`.

---

## What does the template do?

When installing the given `composer.json` some tasks are taken care of:

* Drupal will be installed in the `web`-directory.
* Autoloader is implemented to use the generated composer autoloader in `vendor/autoload.php`,
  instead of the one provided by Drupal (`web/vendor/autoload.php`).
* Modules (packages of type `drupal-module`) will be placed in `web/modules/contrib/`
* Theme (packages of type `drupal-theme`) will be placed in `web/themes/contrib/`
* Profiles (packages of type `drupal-profile`) will be placed in `web/profiles/contrib/`
* Creates default writable versions of `settings.php` and `services.yml`.
* Creates `web/sites/default/files`-directory.
* Latest version of drush is installed locally for use at `vendor/bin/drush`.
* Latest version of DrupalConsole is installed locally for use at `vendor/bin/drupal`.
* Creates environment variables based on your .env file. See [.env.example](.env.example).

## Updating Drupal Core

This project will attempt to keep all of your Drupal Core files up-to-date; the
project [drupal/core-composer-scaffold](https://github.com/drupal/core-composer-scaffold)
is used to ensure that your scaffold files are updated every time drupal/core is
updated. If you customize any of the "scaffolding" files (commonly .htaccess),
you may need to merge conflicts if any of your modified files are updated in a
new release of Drupal core.

Follow the steps below to update your core files.

1. Run `composer update drupal/core drupal/core-dev --with-dependencies` to update Drupal Core and its dependencies.
2. Run `git diff` to determine if any of the scaffolding files have changed.
   Review the files for any changes and restore any customizations to
  `.htaccess` or `robots.txt`.
1. Commit everything all together in a single commit, so `web` will remain in
   sync with the `core` when checking out branches or running `git bisect`.
1. In the event that there are non-trivial conflicts in step 2, you may wish
   to perform these steps on a branch, and use `git merge` to combine the
   updated core files with your customized files. This facilitates the use
   of a [three-way merge tool such as kdiff3](http://www.gitshah.com/2010/12/how-to-setup-kdiff-as-diff-tool-for-git.html). This setup is not necessary if your changes are simple;
   keeping all of your modifications at the beginning or end of the file is a
   good strategy to keep merges easy.

## Generate composer.json from existing project

With using [the "Composer Generate" drush extension](https://www.drupal.org/project/composer_generate)
you can now generate a basic `composer.json` file from an existing project. Note
that the generated `composer.json` might differ from this project's file.


## FAQ

### Should I commit the contrib modules I download?

Composer recommends **no**. They provide [argumentation against but also
workrounds if a project decides to do it anyway](https://getcomposer.org/doc/faqs/should-i-commit-the-dependencies-in-my-vendor-directory.md).

### Should I commit the scaffolding files?

The [Drupal Composer Scaffold](https://github.com/drupal/core-composer-scaffold) plugin can download the scaffold files (like
index.php, update.php, …) to the web/ directory of your project. If you have not customized those files you could choose
to not check them into your version control system (e.g. git). If that is the case for your project it might be
convenient to automatically run the drupal-scaffold plugin after every install or update of your project. You can
achieve that by registering `@composer drupal:scaffold` as post-install and post-update command in your composer.json:

```json
"scripts": {
    "post-install-cmd": [
        "@composer drupal:scaffold",
        "..."
    ],
    "post-update-cmd": [
        "@composer drupal:scaffold",
        "..."
    ]
},
```
### How can I apply patches to downloaded modules?

If you need to apply patches (depending on the project being modified, a pull
request is often a better solution), you can do so with the
[composer-patches](https://github.com/cweagans/composer-patches) plugin.

To add a patch to drupal module foobar insert the patches section in the extra
section of composer.json:
```json
"extra": {
    "patches": {
        "drupal/foobar": {
            "Patch description": "URL or local path to patch"
        }
    }
}
```
### How do I switch from packagist.drupal-composer.org to packages.drupal.org?

Follow the instructions in the [documentation on drupal.org](https://www.drupal.org/docs/develop/using-composer/using-packagesdrupalorg).

### How do I specify a PHP version ?

This project supports PHP 7.0 as minimum version (see [Drupal 8 PHP requirements](https://www.drupal.org/docs/8/system-requirements/drupal-8-php-requirements)), however it's possible that a `composer update` will upgrade some package that will then require PHP 7+.

To prevent this you can add this code to specify the PHP version you want to use in the `config` section of `composer.json`:
```json
"config": {
    "sort-packages": true,
    "platform": {
        "php": "7.0.33"
    }
},
```
